The Big Data processing technologies provide
ways to work with large sets of structured,
semi-structured, and unstructured data so
that value can be derived from big data.
In some of the other videos, we discussed
Big Data technologies such as NoSQL databases
and Data Lakes.
In this video, we are going to talk about
three open source technologies and the role
they play in big data analytics — ApacheHadoop,
Apache Hive, and Apache Spark.
Hadoop is a collection of tools that provides
distributed storage and processing of big
data.
Hive is a data warehouse for data query and
analysis built on top of Hadoop.
Spark is a distributed data analytics framework
designed to perform complex data analytics
in real-time.
Hadoop, a java-based open-source framework,
allows distributed storage and processing
of large datasets across clusters of computers.
In Hadoop distributed system, a node is a
single computer, and a collection of nodes
forms a cluster.
Hadoop can scale up from a single node to
any number of nodes, each offering local storage
and computation.
Hadoop provides a reliable, scalable, and
cost-effective solution for storing data with
no format requirements.
Using Hadoop, you can:
Incorporate emerging data formats, such as
streaming audio, video, social media sentiment,
and clickstream data, along with structured,
semi-structured, and unstructured data not
traditionally used in a data warehouse.
Provide real-time, self-service access for
all stakeholders.
Optimize and streamline costs in your enterprise
data warehouse by consolidating data across
the organization and moving “cold” data,
that is, data that is not in frequent use,
to a Hadoop-based system.
One of the four main components of Hadoop
is Hadoop Distributed File System, or HDFS,
which is a storage system for big data that
runs on multiple commodity hardware connected
through a network.
HDFS provides scalable and reliable big data
storage by partitioning files over multiple
nodes.
It splits large files across multiple computers,
allowing parallel access to them.
Computations can, therefore, run in parallel
on each node where data is stored.
It also replicates file blocks on different
nodes to prevent data loss, making it fault-tolerant.
Let’s understand this through an example.
Consider a file that includes phone numbers
for everyone in the United States; the numbers
for people with last name starting with A
might be stored on server 1, B on server 2,
and so on.
With Hadoop, pieces of this phonebook would
be stored across the cluster.
To reconstruct the entire phonebook, your
program would need the blocks from every server
in the cluster.
HDFS also replicates these smaller pieces
onto two additional servers by default, ensuring
availability when a server fails,
In addition to higher availability, this offers
multiple benefits.
It allows the Hadoop cluster to break up work
into smaller chunks and run those jobs on
all servers in the cluster for better scalability.
Finally, you gain the benefit of data locality,
which is the process of moving the computation
closer to the node on which the data resides.
This is critical when working with large data
sets because it minimizes network congestion
and increases throughput.
Some of the other benefits that come from
using HDFS include:
Fast recovery from hardware failures, because
HDFS is built to detect faults and automatically
recover.
Access to streaming data, because HDFS supports
high data throughput rates.
Accommodation of large data sets, because
HDFS can scale to hundreds of nodes, or computers,
in a single cluster.
Portability, because HDFS is portable across
multiple hardware platforms and compatible
with a variety of underlying operating systems.
Hive is an open-source data warehouse software
for reading, writing, and managing large data
set files that are stored directly in either
HDFS or other data storage systems such as
Apache HBase.
Hadoop is intended for long sequential scans
and, because Hive is based on Hadoop, queries
have very high latency—which means Hive
is less appropriate for applications that
need very fast response times.
Also, Hive is read-based, and therefore not
suitable for transaction processing that typically
involves a high percentage of write operations.
Hive is better suited for data warehousing
tasks such as ETL, reporting, and data analysis
and includes tools that enable easy access
to data via SQL.
This brings us to Spark, a general-purpose
data processing engine designed to extract
and process large volumes of data for a wide
range of applications, including Interactive
Analytics, Streams Processing, Machine Learning,
Data Integration, and ETL.
It takes advantage of in-memory processing
to significantly increase the speed of computations
and spilling to disk only when memory is constrained.
Spark has interfaces for major programming
languages, including Java, Scala, Python,
R, and SQL.
It can run using its standalone clustering
technology as well as on top of other infrastructures
such as Hadoop.
And it can access data in a large variety
of data sources, including HDFS and Hive,
making it highly versatile.
The ability to process streaming data fast
and perform complex analytics in real-time
is the key use case for Apache Spark.